=pod

=head1 NAME

B<harry> - a tool for measuring string similarity 

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<harry> [B<options>] [B<-c> I<config>] I<input> I<output>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<harry> is a small tool for measuring the similarity of strings. The tool
supports common distance and kernel functions for strings as well as some
exotic similarity measures.  The focus of B<harry> lies on implicit
similarity measures, that is, comparison functions that do not give rise to
an explicit vector space.  Examples of such similarity measures are the
Levenshtein distance, the Jaro-Winkler distance or the normalized
compression distance.

During operation B<harry> loads a set of strings from I<input>, computes the
specified similarity measure and writes a matrix of similarity values to
I<output>.  The similarity measure can be computed based on the granularity
of characters as well as words contained in the strings.  The configuration
of this process, such as the input format, the similarity measure and the
output format, are specified in the file I<config> and can be additionally
refined using command-line options.

    .---------.                        .----------.
    |  lines  |                        |   text   |
    |   dir   |   \   .---------.   /  |  libsvm  |
    |  stdin  |   --  |  Harry  |  --  |  stdout  |
    |   ...   |   /   '---------'   \  |   ...    |
    '---------'                        '----------'
       Input      Similarity Measures     Output


B<harry> is implemented using OpenMP, such that the computation time for a
set of strings scales linear with the number of available CPU cores. 
Moreover, efficient implementations of several similarity measures,
effective caching of similarity values and low-overhead locking further
speedup the computation.

B<harry> complements the tool B<sally>(1) that embeds strings in a vector
space and allows computing vectorial similarity measures, such as the cosine
distance and the bag-of-words kernel.

=head1 CONFIGURATION

The configuration of B<harry> is provided by a configuration file.  This
file is structured into the three sections B<input>, B<measures> and
B<output>, which define the parameters of the input format, the similarity
measures and the output format, respectively.  If no configuration file is
provided, B<harry> resorts to a default configuration.  This default
configuration can be printed using the command-line option B<-D> (see
B<OPTIONS>).

=head2 Input formats

B<harry> supports different formats for reading sets of strings, which may
range from plain files to directories and other structured resources.  The
input format is specified in the configuration file of B<harry>, but can
also be defined on the command line using the option B<-i> (see B<OPTIONS>).
Following is a list of supported input formats:  

=over 4

=item B<input = {>

=over 4

=item B<input_format = "lines";>

This parameter specifies the input format.

=over 14

=item I<"lines">

The input strings are available as lines in a text file. The name of the
file is given as I<input> to B<harry>.  The lines need to be separated by
newline and may not contain the NUL character.  Labels can be extracted from
each line using a regular expression (see B<lines_regex>).

=item I<"stdin">

The input strings are available as text lines on standard input (stdin). 
The parameter I<input> is ignored. The lines need to be separated by
newline and may not contain the NUL character.  Labels can be extracted from
each line using a regular expression (see B<lines_regex>).

=item I<"dir"> 

The input strings are available as binary files in a directory and the
name of the directory is given as I<input> to B<harry>. The suffixes
of the files are used as labels for the strings.

=item I<"arc"> 

The input strings are available as binary files in a compressed archive,
such as a zip or tgz archive.  The name of the archive is given as I<input>
to B<harry>.  The suffixes of the files are used as labels for the strings.

=item I<"fasta">

The input strings are available in FASTA format. The name of the file is
given as I<input> to B<harry>.  Labels can be extracted from the description
of each sequence using a regular expression (see B<fasta_regex>).  Comments
are allowed if they are preceded by either ';' or '>'.

=back 

=item B<chunk_size = 256;>

To enable an efficient processing of large data sets, B<harry> loads strings
in chunks.  This parameter defines the number of strings in one of these
chunks.  Depending on the lengths and type of the strings, this parameter
can be adjusted to improve loading times.

=item B<decode_str = false;>

If this parameter is set to I<true>, B<harry> automatically decodes strings
that contain URI-encoded characters.  That is, substrings of the form %XX
are replaced with the byte corresponding to the hexadecimal number XX.

=item B<fasta_regex = " (\\+|-)?[0-9]+";>

The FASTA format allows to equip each string with a short description.  In
several data sets this description contains a numerical label which can be
used for supervised learning tasks.  The parameter defines a regular
expression that matches these numerical labels, such as +1 and -1.

=item B<lines_regex = "^(\\+|-)?[0-9]+";>

If the strings are available as text lines, the parameter can be used to
extract a numerical label from the strings.  The parameter is a regular
expression matching labels, such as +1 and -1.

=item B<reverse_str = false;>

If this parameter is set to I<true>, the characters of all input strings
will be reversed.  Such reversing might help in situations where the reading
direction of the input strings is unspecified.

=item B<stopword_file = "";>

Stop words (irrelevant words) can be filtered from the strings by providing
a file containing these words; one per line.  Non-printable characters can
be escaped using URI encoding (%XX).  Stop words can only be filtered, if a
set of delimiters is defined using B<word_delim>.

=back

=item B<};>

=back

=head2 Similarity Measures

B<harry> supports different similarity measures for comparing string,
including common distance and kernel functions.  The similarity measure can
be specified in the configuration file as well as on the command line using
the option B<-m> (see B<OPTIONS>).  The name of each similarity measure is
prefixed by its type (I<dist_> for distances, I<kern_> for kernels and
I<sim_> for similarity measures).  For convenience, this prefix can be
omitted.  Moreover, the names of some similarity measures are aliased,
for example, the normalized compression distance is available as
I<dist_compression> and I<dist_ncd>.

Parameters of the similarity measures are organized in individual
configuration groups.  For instance, parameters of the Levenshtein distance
are defined in the group B<dist_levenshtein>, while parameters for the Jaro
and Jaro-Winkler distance are given in B<dist_jarowinkler>.

=over 4

=item B<measures = {>

=over 4

=item B<type = "dist_levenshtein">

The parameter B<type> specifies the similarity measure that is used for
comparing the strings. Supported similarity measures are:

=over 4

=item I<"dist_hamming">

Hamming distance. See configuration group B<dist_hamming>.

=item I<"dist_levenshtein">, I<"dist_edit">

Levenshtein distance. See configuration group B<dist_levenshtein>.

=item I<"dist_damerau">

Damerau-Levenshtein distance. See configuration group B<dist_damerau>.

=item I<"dist_osa">

Optimal string alignment (OSA) distance. See configuration group B<dist_osa>.

=item I<"dist_jaro">

Jaro distance. See configuration group B<dist_jarowinkler>.

=item I<"dist_jarowinkler">

Jaro-Winkler distance. See configuration group B<dist_jarowinkler>.

=item I<"dist_lee">

Lee distance. See configuration group B<dist_lee>

=item I<"dist_compression">, I<"dist_ncd">

Normalized compression distance (NCD). See configuration group B<dist_compression>.

=item I<"dist_bag">

Bag distance. See configuration group B<dist_bag>.

=item I<"dist_kernel">

Kernel-based distance. See configuration group B<dist_kernel>.

=item I<"kern_subsequence">, I<"kern_ssk">

Subsequence kernel (SSK). See configuration group B<kern_subsequence>.

=item I<"kern_spectrum">, I<"kern_ngram">

Spectrum kernel (also n-gram kernel). See configuration group B<kern_spectrum>.

=item I<"kern_wdegree">, I<"kern_wdk">

Weighted-degree kernel (WDK) with shifts. See configuration group B<kern_wdegree>.

=item I<"kern_distance">, I<"kern_dsk">

Distance substitution kernel (DSK). See configuration group B<kern_distance>.

=item I<"sim_simpson">

Simpson coefficient. See configuration group B<sim_coefficient>.

=item I<"sim_jaccard">

Jaccard coefficient.  See configuration group B<sim_coefficient>.

=item I<"sim_braun">

Braun-Blanquet coefficient.  See configuration group B<sim_coefficient>.

=item I<"sim_dice">, I<"sim_czekanowski">

Dice-coefficient (Czekanowsi coefficient) See configuration group
B<sim_coefficient>.

=item I<"sim_sokal">, I<"sim_anderberg">

Sokal-Sneath coefficient (Anderberg coefficient).  See configuration group
B<sim_coefficient>.

=item I<"sim_kulczynski">

Second Kulczynski coefficient.  See configuration group B<sim_coefficient>.

=item I<"sim_otsuka">, I<"sim_ochiai">

Otsuka coefficient (Ochiai coefficient).  See configuration group
B<sim_coefficient>.

=back

=item B<word_delim = "";>

The parameter B<word_delim> defines characters for delimiting words in
strings.  If this parameter is set, the comparison of strings is performed
on words, that is, each word is considered as a symbol.  If the parameter
B<word_delim> is an empty strings, B<harry> considers each individual
character as a symbol.

=item B<num_threads = 0;>

The parameter B<num_threads> sets the number of threads for the calculation
of the similarity measures.  If set 0, B<harry> determines the number of
available CPU cores using OpenMP and sets the number of threads accordingly.

=item B<cache_size = 256;>

The parameter B<cache_size> specifies the maximum size of the internal cache
in megabytes (Mb).  The general-purpose cache is used to speed up
computations of B<harry> for some similarity measures.

=item B<global_cache = false;>

By default B<harry> caches only internal computations. If this parameter is
set to I<true>, all similarity values are stored in the cache.  This feature
should only be enabled if many of the compared strings are identical and
thus caching similarity values can provide benefits.

=item B<x_range = "";>

=item B<y_range = "";>

These two parameters control which strings are used for computing the matrix
of similarity values.  The format of the ranges is similar to indexing of
Python arrays.  Each parameter specifies an index range of the form
"I<start>:I<end>", where I<start> defines the index of the first string
and I<end> defines the index after the last string.  For example, I<"0:4">
selects the strings at index 0, 1, 2, and 3.  If the start or end index is
omitted, the minimum or maximum value is substituted, respectively.  For
example, I<":4"> selects strings starting from the index I<0> and I<":">
chooses all strings.  If the end index is negative, it is substracted from
the maximum index, that is, I<":-1"> selects all strings except for the last
one.

=item B<dist_hamming = {> 

This module implements the Hamming distance (see Hamming, 1950).  The
runtime complexity of a comparison is linear in the length of the strings.
If the compared strings have unequal length, the length difference is added
to the distance.  The following parameters are supported:

=over 4

=item B<norm = "none";>

This parameter specifies the normalization of the distance. Supported values
are I<"none"> for no normalization, I<"min"> for normalization on the
minimum length, I<"max"> for normalization on the maximum length, I<"avg">
for normalization on the average length of the compared strings.

=back

=item B<};>

=item B<dist_levenshtein = {> 

This module implements the Levenshtein distance (see Levenshtein, 1966). The
runtime complexity of a comparison is quadratic in the length of the
strings.  The following parameters are supported:

=over 4

=item B<norm = "none";>

This parameter specifies the normalization of the distance. Supported values
are I<"none"> for no normalization, I<"min"> for normalization on the
minimum length, I<"max"> for normalization on the maximum length, I<"avg">
for normalization on the average length of the compared 

=item B<cost_ins = 1.0;>

=item B<cost_del = 1.0;>

=item B<cost_sub = 1.0;>

The computation of the distance can be adapted using three parameters
defining the cost for an insertion, deletion and substitution,
respectively.  The default costs are I<1.0> for each operation.

=back

=item B<};>

=item B<dist_damerau = {> 

This module implements the Damerau-Levenshtein distance (see Damerau, 1964). 
The runtime and space complexity of a comparison is quadratic in the length
of the strings.  The following parameters are supported:

=over 4

=item B<norm = "none";>

This parameter specifies the normalization of the distance. Supported values
are I<"none"> for no normalization, I<"min"> for normalization on the
minimum length, I<"max"> for normalization on the maximum length, I<"avg">
for normalization on the average length of the compared strings.

=item B<cost_ins = 1.0;>

=item B<cost_del = 1.0;>

=item B<cost_sub = 1.0;>

=item B<cost_tra = 1.0;>

The computation of the distance can be adapted using four parameters
defining the cost for an insertion, deletion, substitution and
transposition, respectively.  The default costs are I<1.0> for each
operation.

=back

=item B<};>


=item B<dist_osa = {> 

This module implements the optimal string alignment (OSA) distance, which is
often confused with the Damerau-Levenshtein distance.  The difference
between the two is that the OSA distance computes the number of edit
operations needed to make the strings equal under the condition that no
substring is edited more than once.  (see the Wikipedia article on the
Damerau-Levenshtein distance).  The runtime and space complexity of a
comparison is quadratic in the length of the strings.  The following
parameters are supported:

=over 4

=item B<norm = "none";>

This parameter specifies the normalization of the distance. Supported values
are I<"none"> for no normalization, I<"min"> for normalization on the
minimum length, I<"max"> for normalization on the maximum length, I<"avg">
for normalization on the average length of the compared strings.

=item B<cost_ins = 1.0;>

=item B<cost_del = 1.0;>

=item B<cost_sub = 1.0;>

=item B<cost_tra = 1.0;>

The computation of the distance can be adapted using four parameters
defining the cost for an insertion, deletion, substitution and
transposition, respectively.  The default costs are I<1.0> for each
operation.

=back

=item B<};>

=item B<dist_jarowinkler = {> 

This module implements the Jaro distance (Jaro, 1989) and the Jaro-Winkler
distance (Winkler, 1990).  In contrast to the original formulation, a valid
distance function is implemented, where similar strings yield a low value
and dissimilar strings a high value.  The runtime complexity of a comparison
is quadratic in the length of the strings.  The following parameters are
supported:

=over 4

=item B<scaling = 0.1;>

If this parameter is set to I<0>, the original Jaro distance is returned,
otherwise the Jaro-Winkler distance is calculated. This distance uses a
B<scaling> which gives more favorable ratings to strings that match from
the beginning up to 4 symbols. The default value is I<0.1>.

=back

=item B<};>

=item B<dist_lee = {> 

This module implements the Lee distance (Lee, 1958) for strings. The runtime
complexity of a comparison is linear in the length of the strings. If the
compared strings have unequal length, the remaining symbols of the longer
string are added to the distance. The following parameters are supported:

=over 4

=item B<min_sym = 0;>
=item B<max_sym = 255;>

These parameters specify the range of symbols, that is, the minimum and
maximum value of a symbol in all strings.  If the strings consist of bytes,
B<min_sym> is typically set to I<0> and B<max_sym> to I<255>.  For printable
characters the range can be further narrowed to I<32> and I<126>.  If words
are analyzed using the parameter B<word_delim>, B<min_sym> must be set to 0
and B<max_sym> to I<65535>, as the words are mapped to integers in this
range.

=back

=item B<};>

=item B<dist_compression = {> 

This module implements the normalized compression distance for strings
(Cilibrasi and Vitanyi, 2005).  The distance is "symmetrized".  The
compression is implemented using B<zlib>.  Note that the comparison of
strings highly depends on the characteristics of the compressor (Cebrian et
al., 2005).  The strings should not be longer than 16 kilobytes, such that
two strings fit into the window of B<zlib>.  The runtime complexity of a
comparison is linear in the length of the strings, though with a large
constant factor.  The following parameters are supported:

=over 4

=item B<level = 9;> 

This parameter defines the compression level used by B<zlib> and must be
between I<1> and I<9>, where I<1> gives the best speed and I<9> the best
compression.  See B<zlib(3)>

=back

=item B<};>

=item B<dist_bag = {> 

This module implements the bag distance (see Bartolini et al., 2002). The
distance approximates and lower bounds the Levenshtein distance.  The
runtime complexity of a comparison is linear in the length of the strings. 
The following parameters are supported:

=over 4

=item B<norm = "none";>

This parameter specifies the normalization of the distance. Supported values
are I<"none"> for no normalization, I<"min"> for normalization on the
minimum length, I<"max"> for normalization on the maximum length, I<"avg">
for normalization on the average length of the compared strings.

=back

=item B<};>

=item B<dist_kernel = {> 

This module implements a kernel-based distance, that is, a distance  is
computed given a kernel function for strings.  The specified kernel function
is mapped to a Euclidean distance using simple geometry.  The runtime
complexity depends on the kernel function.  The following parameters are
supported:

=over 4

=item B<kern = "kern_wdegree";>

This parameter selects the kernel function to use for the distance. The
kernel is mapped to a Euclidean distance using simple geometry.

=item B<norm = "none";>

This parameter specifies the normalization of the kernel. Supported values
are I<"none"> for no normalization and I<"l2"> for the standard l2
normalization of kernels.

=item B<squared = true;>

The module computes a Euclidean distance from the given kernel function. If
this parameter is enabled a squared Euclidean distance is returned which
is slightly faster due to the omitted root computation.

=back

=item B<};>

=item B<kern_wdegree = {>

This module implements the weighted-degree kernel with shifts (Sonnenburg et
al., 2007).  The runtime complexity is linear in the length of the strings. 
If the strings have unequal length, the remaining symbols of the longer
string are ignored, in accordance with the kernel definition.  The following
parameters are supported:

=over 4

=item B<norm = "none";>

This parameter specifies the normalization of the kernel. Supported values
are I<"none"> for no normalization and I<"l2"> for the standard l2 
normalization of kernels.

=item B<degree = 3;>

This parameter specifies the degree of the kernel, that is, the length of
considered k-mers/k-grams.  As the kernel computation is implicit, the
k-mers are not extracted but implicitly counted by blocks of matching symbols.

=item B<shift = 0;>

To compensate noise in the strings, the kernel can be computed with "shifts". 
The strings are compared multiple times with different positive and negative
offsets up to B<shift> symbols.  The different kernel values are added.  The
runtime complexity is increased by twice the value of B<shift>.

=back

=item B<};>

=item B<kern_subsequence = {>

This module implements the subsequence kernel (Lodhi et al., 2002). The
runtime complexity is quadratic in the length of the strings. The following
parameters are supported:

=over 4

=item B<norm = "none";>

This parameter specifies the normalization of the kernel. Supported values
are I<"none"> for no normalization and I<"l2"> for the standard l2 
normalization of kernels.

=item B<length = 3;>

This parameter specifies the length of subsequence to consider.

=item B<lambda = 0.1;>

This parameter is a weighting term for gaps within subsequences.

=back


=item B<};>

=item B<kern_spectrum = {>

This module implements the spectrum kernel (Leslie et al., 2002). The
runtime complexity is linear in the length of the strings.  The spectrum
kernel is closely related to bag-of-words kernels.  Thus, the tool
B<sally(1)> may be alternatively used to compute the kernel using an
explicit vector space.  The following parameters are supported by the
implementation:

=over 4

=item B<norm = "none";>

This parameter specifies the normalization of the kernel. Supported values
are I<"none"> for no normalization and I<"l2"> for the standard l2 
normalization of kernels.

=item B<length = 3;>

This parameter specifies the length of k-mers/k-grams to consider. 

=back

=item B<};>

=item B<kern_distance = {>

This module implements distance substitution kernels (Haasdonk and Bahlmann,
2004).  The empty string is considered the origin of the underlying implicit
vector space.  The runtime complexity depends on the selected distance
function.  The following parameters are supported:

=over 4

=item B<dist = "dist_bag";>

This parameter selects the distance function to use for the kernel.
Depending on the type of the substitution and the selected distance, the
kernel might not be positive semi-definite.

=item B<type = "linear";> 

Four types of substitutions can be selected for creating a kernel from a
distance function: I<"linear">, I<"poly">, I<"neg"> and I<"rbf">.  For a
detailed explanation of each substitution see the paper by Haasdonk and
Bahlmann (2004).

=item B<norm = "none";>

This parameter specifies the normalization of the kernel. Supported values
are I<"none"> for no normalization and I<"l2"> for the standard l2 
normalization of kernels. 

=item B<gamma = 1.0;>

This parameter specifies a scaling factor for the substitution types
I<"poly"> and I<"rbf">.

=item B<degree = 1.0;>

This parameter defines a polynomial degree for the substitution types 
I<"poly"> and I<"neg">.

=back

=item B<};>

=item B<sim_coefficient = {>

This module implements several similarity coefficients for strings (see
Cheetham and Hazel, 1969).  The runtime complexity of a comparison is linear
in the length of the strings.  The following parameters are supported:

=over 4

=item B<matching = "bin";>

The parameter specifies how the symbols of the strings are matched. If the
parameter is set to I<"bin">, the symbols are considered as binary attributes
that are either present or not.  If the parameter is set to I<"cnt">, the
count of each symbol is considered for the matching.

=back

=item B<};>

=back

=item B<};>

=back

=head2 Output formats

Once strings have been compared, B<harry> stores the similarity values in
one of several common formats, which allows for applying typical tools of
statistics and machine learning to the data.  Following is a list of
supported output formats and respective parameters.  Additionally, the
output format can be specified using the command-line option B<-o> (see
B<OPTIONS>).

=over 4

=item B<output = {>

=over 4

=item B<output_format = "text";>

Following is a list of output formats supported by B<harry>:

=over 14

=item I<"text"> 

The similarity values are stored as plain text. 

=item I<"stdout">

The similarity values are written to standard output (stdout) as plain text.

=item I<"libsvm">

The similarity values are stored as precomputed kernel for libsvm. 

=back

=item B<separator = ",";>

This parameter defines the separator used in text mode for separating
the similarity values.

=item B<save_indices = true;>

If this parameter is to I<true> and supported by the output format, the
indices of the strings will be stored in an extra column and row.

=item B<save_labels = false;>

If this parameter is to I<true> and supported by the output format, the
labels of the strings will be stored in an extra column and row.

=item B<save_sources = false;>

If this parameter is to I<true> and supported by the output format, the
sources of the strings will be stored in an extra column and row.

=item B<triangular = false;>

If this parameter is set to I<true> and supported by the output format, a
triangular matrix (upper triangle of the similarity matrix) will be stored. 
The required storage space is reduced by almost a half.

=item B<compress = false;>

If this parameter is set to I<true>, the output is stored using zlib
compression, which can significantly reduce the required disk space. 
Several programs support reading files compressed using zlib. 
Alternatively, the tools gzcat(1) and gunzip(1) can be used to access the
data.

=back

=item B<};>

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

The configuration of B<harry> can be refined using several command-line
options.  Moreover, some parameters of the configuration can be overwritten
on the command line.  Following is the list of options:

=head2 I/O options
  -i,  --input_format <format>   Set input format for strings.
       --decode_str              Enable URI-decoding of strings.
       --reverse_str             Reverse (flip) all strings.
       --stopword_file <file>    Provide a file with stop words.
  -o,  --output_format <format>  Set output format for matrix.
  -z,  --compress                Enable zlib compression of output.
  -u,  --triangular              Save triangular matrix only.

=head2 Module options:
  -m,  --measure <name>          Set similarity measure.
  -d,  --word_delim <delim>      Set delimiters for words.
  -n,  --num_threads <num>       Set number of threads.
  -a,  --cache_size <size>       Set size of cache in megabytes.
  -g,  --global_cache            Enable global cache for similarity values.
  -x,  --x_range <start>:<end>   Set the index range (x) of strings.
  -y,  --y_range <start>:<end>   Set the index range (y) of stirngs.

=head2 Generic options:
  -c,  --config_file <file>      Set configuration file.
  -v,  --verbose                 Increase verbosity.
  -l,  --log_line                Print a log line every minute
  -q,  --quiet                   Be quiet during processing.
  -M,  --print_measures          Print list of similarity measures
  -C,  --print_config            Print the current configuration.
  -D,  --print_defaults          Print the default configuration.
  -V,  --version                 Print version and copyright.
  -h,  --help                    Print this help screen.

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<PREFIX/share/doc/harry/example.cfg>

An example configuration file for B<harry>. See the configuration
section for further details.

=back

=head1 LIMITATIONS

B<harry> supports only symmetric similarity measures, that is, m(x,y) =
m(y,x) for all x and y.  This restriction saves considerable run-time and
memory in most cases.  However, some similarity measures need to be
artificially "symmetrized", such as the normalized compression distance,
thereby requiring additional computations.
 
=head1 REFERENCES

Bartolini, Ciaccia, Patella. String Matching with Metric Trees Using an
Approximate Distance.  String Processing and Information Retrieval, LNCS
2476, 271-283, 2002.

Cebrian, Alfonseca, and Ortega. Common pitfalls using the normalized
compression distance.  Communications in Information and Systems, 5 (4),
367-384, 2005.

Cheetham and Hazel. Binary (Presence-Absence) Similarity Coefficients.
Journal of Paleontology, 43:5, 1130-1136, 1969

Cilibrasi and Vitanyi. Clustering by compression, IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory, 51:4, 1523-1545, 2005.

Damerau. A technique for computer detection and correction of spelling
errors, Communications of the ACM, 7(3):171-176, 1964

Haasdonk and Bahlmann. Learning with Distance Substitution Kernels. Pattern
Recognition ; DAGM Symposium, 220-227, 2004.

Hamming. Error-detecting and error-correcting codes. Bell System Technical
Journal, 29(2):147-160, 1950.

Jaro. Advances in record linkage methodology as applied to the 1985 census
of Tampa Florida.  Journal of the American Statistical Association 84 (406):
414-420, 1989.

Lee. Some properties of nonbinary error-correcting codes. IRE Transactions
on Information Theory 4 (2): 77-82, 1958.

Levenshtein. Binary codes capable of correcting deletions, insertions, and
reversals.  Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR, 163 (4):845-848, 1966.

Lodhi, Saunders, Shawe-Taylor, Cristianini, and Watkins. Text classification
using string kernels.  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2:419-444,
2002.

Sonnenburg, Raetsch, and Rieck. Large scale learning with string kernels. In
Large Scale Kernel Machines, pages 73--103.  MIT Press, 2007.

Winkler.  String Comparator Metrics and Enhanced Decision Rules in the
Fellegi-Sunter Model of Record Linkage.  Proceedings of the Section on
Survey Research Methods.  354-359, 1990.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2013 Konrad Rieck (konrad@mlsec.org)

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at your option)
any later version.  This program is distributed without any warranty.  See
the GNU General Public License for more details.

=cut
